Keycloak 19034 transform wip google doc to community design proposal (#2)
mhajas/keycloak-community: design/keycloak.x/storage-hot-rod.md

# Data structure definition

For describing a structure of data that is stored in the Infinispan server there are Protobuf message definitions. Message definitions represents storage representation of objects. Based on the message definition the Hot Rod client knows how to marshal and unmarshal the data that is sent/received to/from server. To make the Infinispan server able to query stored data, it is also necessary to share message definitions with the Infinispan server.

An example of a message definition is following:

```protobuf
package nodowntimeupgrade;

message InfinispanObjectEntity {

>     required string entitySchemaVersion = 1;

Reviewer: int?

>     required string entitySchemaVersion = 1;

Reviewer: int?

### Changing field name/type

It is possible to change field names or types. However, such changes can introduce backward incompatibility that we need to avoid due to no-downtime requirements. We can avoid breaking backward compatibility by doing updates in the  steps explained below. 

The steps will be illustrated on the following example: let us have a message definition containing field `clientTemplateId` in the first physical version (`entityVersion = 1`). We want to replace it with `clientScopeId`. The migration path is prescribed as `clientScopeId = "template-" + clientTemplateId`).

---

**NOTE**

In this proposal, we distinguish between two types of version:

> * **Version of storage** - This corresponds to the version of source code and message definitions on the Keycloak server side. Each storage area (clients, realms, groups, etc.) has its own independent storage version that is incremented only when there is a change in the source code or message definition in the corresponding storage area. 

Reviewer: This spec really should not introduce a new notions that are shared across all the storages. This should be done in the `storage-persistence.md`, and it seems it is the `current store version` defined there.
I take it that we need to invent a better name for `logical object version`.

   together with `clientScopeId`. This is to support the reading of objects version 2 by storage version 1. 
   1. When reading an old physical representation from the storage. The `clientTemplateId` field is read from the storage, and migrated to `clientScopeId`. This step is necessary read objects version 1 by storage version 2.
   2. When querying objects. This will be discussed in the section [Querying objects](#querying-objects).
3. Then, there can be a new storage version `>= 3` which removes the deprecated `clientTemplateId`. Migrating to that storage version requires that all stored objects are migrated to physical object version `>= 2`. We will get back to the removal of fields later as it gets more complicated with regards to querying.

# Reading older physical representations

Each physical representation contains `entityVersion` field that represents its physical representation version (version of the storage that created it). To fulfill the requirements for 0-downtime upgrades, we need to be able to read all older physical representations of objects. 

> As described in the previous section, unmarshaling of stored objects is flexible enough to be able to read an older version when message definition contains all fields in unmarshalled stream. Moreover, unknown fields are ignored; though, we are losing the information that was stored there. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described in the previous section, unmarshaling of stored objects is flexible enough to be able to read an older version when message definition contains all fields in unmarshalled stream. Beware of premature removal of field definitions: Unknown fields are ignored so even when their existence is transparent to the reader, the information stored there would be lost.
```

}
```

> * When Keycloak storage corresponding to _entity schema version_ `2` detects that obtained storage representation has an older version (in this case `1`) than the current (`2`), it wraps the read storage representation into a migration object. 

Reviewer: storage representation -> physical representation
